# 102_Read_06

- [JS Intro Paragraph](#js-intro-paragraph)
- [Introduction to JavaScript - basic output](#introduction-to-javascript---basic-output)
- [JavaScript input with prompt and confirm](#javascript-input-with-prompt-and-confirm)
- [Variables](#variables)
- [Answer](#answer)

## JS Intro Paragraph

Not be confused with ***[Java](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_(programming_language))***; although both are trademarks of **[Oracle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oracle_Corporation)**, they are completely different languages with different syntax and uses.  
JavaScript is commonly, but not exclusively, known as the scripting language of websites. It is a lightweight, interpreted language with dynamic capabilities.  
Examples of non-web based uses for JavaScript include; Node.js, jQuery, Adobe and others.  

[ECMA-262](https://ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-262/) and [ECMA-402](https://ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-402/) are the specification standards for JavaScript.

## Introduction to JavaScript - basic output

JavaScript is traditionally included in an HTML page by the author/developer and executed when the user receives and loads the page information. As opposed to executing code before transmission, the code is executed after receiving. Nowadays, there are instances of either before or after use case scenarios as to when JS would be executed.  

JS is distinguished by 3 major parts:

- The language itself
- The DOM API - **D**ocument **O**bject **M**odel, **A**pplication **P**rogramming **I**nterface; the various ways JS can interact with different parts of a web page to produce output dependent on APIs called.
- The API - the application programming interface that is provided from server-side systems.  

JS can be embedded directly within the HTML file (`<script>` is the opening and `</script>` is the closing) or linked externally from a JS file.  

The `alert()` function will print whatever is within parentheses in a pop-up box with an "OK" button; rarely used.

``` js
alert("Welcome to Class :)");
```

`document.write()` can be used to write text or inject other snippets of code through parts of the HTML file, for example recalling variables and their data

``` js
document.write("You are currently enrolled in the ITTP through GICW.");
```

will simply output "You are currently enrolled in the ITTP through GICW." wherever the snippet of JS code is inserted in the doc.

`console.log()`
prints debugging info on the JS console that shows warnings and errors generated by JS execution.

## JavaScript input with prompt and confirm

``` js
let name = prompt("What class is this?:", "102? 201? 301?");
document.write("You are currently enrolled in ", name, " through GICW ITTP");
```

will show a pop-up with text provided, asking "What class is this? and textbox for users to fill in the second pair of `""` with some pre-filled text. The value input is returned upon pressing 'OK'. `document.write` is updated with said value; pre-filling the second value, with an output of "You are currently enrolled in ___ through GICW ITTP." Canceling or pressing escape will result in 'null' return.  

`confirm()` function will ask the user to answer a question in a Yes or No fashion in a pop-up window. Basically, if yes, do this; else no, do this, type function. `if` equals yes, `else` equals no/alternative.

``` js
if (confirm("Shall I print Welcome to class?")) {
 document.write("Welcome to class!");
} else {
 document.write("No class today... ):");
}
```

Pressing 'OK' at the prompt will print "Welcome to class!", 'Cancel' will print "No class today... ):".

## Variables

Variables are containers for data. Much like basic algebra; giving letters or phrases a shorthand / other value. The modern ways to declare are `let` and `const`; `var` and automatically declaring (when undeclared variables are first declared, `x = so and so`) are outdated methods to declare.  
The `=` sign is referred to as the assignment operator used in declarations of variables (equal to is written as `==`). Variables can be used to do arithmetic, just as they can be used to combine strings together.  

``` js
let x = 5;
let y = 6;
let z = x + y;
```

Outputs 11 for the value of `x` wherever it may be used or called for in your file.

Similarily for `const`; which should be used when the value declared in the variable should not be changed for any reason.  

Variables can be identified with identifiers; like letters or be descriptive, such as names or phrases.

- CAN contain letter, digits, underscores (_), and dollar signs ("$", not very common)
- MUST begin with a letter, dollar sign or underscore (not number)
- CASE-SENSITIVE
- Reversed words cannot be used (JS keywords).  

One statement/declaration can hold many variables within it and span multiple lines, just separate them with commas (,).

``` js
let blue = 58, yellow = 72, place = "My house";
```

## Answer

1. What are variables in JavaScript?
    - Variables are containers. They hold data that has been declared, whether that be numbers or strings (words, phrases, sentences and/or numbers not used arithmetically).
2. What does it mean to declare a variable?
    - To declare a variable is to assign it a name, letter, phrase, or otherwise identifier to be used in a function.
3. What is an “assignment” operator, and what does it do?
    - The (=) is the assignment operator, it makes the association between the identifier and the data within the variable.
4. What is information received from the user called?
    - input.
